End of chapter problems | **DO NOT FORGET**

need a clicker

extra credit - 10 total, 5% curve
final replaces lowest test grade

make up 1 missed exam (does not replace) on dead day

make sure when emailing to use CHM 116-A

**DOES NOT ROUND UP**

- Final Date: Thursday, May 18, 11:00 am to 1:00 pm

Red color material in course content is not covered in class (due to it being blended). 

---

## Chapters 1 and 3

### What is Chemistry:
- The study of *Matter*
- **Matter** is anything that occupies space
- **Properties**: The laudry list of what the object can do
	- Ex: Paper has the ability to combust

Examples of chemicals:
- H<sub>2</sub>O
- CO<sub>2</sub>
- Ethanol
Anything that can be used in chemistry is a chemical.

### Scientific Method:
1. Observations: The first step of the scientific method is to make an observation. This involves gathering information about a particular phenomenon or problem. This can be done through direct observation, or through the use of instruments such as microscopes, telescopes, or thermometers.

2. Hypothesis: After gathering the data, the next step is to form a hypothesis. A hypothesis is an educated guess as to what might be causing the phenomenon or problem. This is done by analyzing the data and using logic to come up with a possible explanation.

3. Scientific Experiment: Once a hypothesis is formed, the next step is to test it. This is done through a scientific experiment. Experiments are designed to test the hypothesis and see if it is correct.

4. Scientific Theory: If the results of the experiment support the hypothesis, then it is accepted as a scientific theory. A scientific theory is an explanation for a phenomenon or problem that is based on scientific evidence.

A **scientific law** is a statement that describes and predicts a natural phenomenon. It is based on repeated experiments or observations and is accepted as a fundamental principle of science. Examples of scientific laws include Newton's law of universal gravitation, the law of conservation of mass, and the law of conservation of energy.

### Common Terms:
- Atom - the basic unit of a chemical element
	- How big is an atom?
		- 6.022 x 10<sup>23</sup>
		- Very very very very small
- Molecules - two or more atoms attached together in a specific geometrical arrangement. These attachemnts are called bonds
- Bonds - Are attractive forces that hold atoms together

### Chemical Reactions
- Rearrangement of atoms to form new chemicals

Reactants - the things you put in, on the left side of the equation
Yield sign
Product - the result of the reactants
Atoms that go in have to equal those that go out

To have a successful reaction you must have **3 things**:
- Collision
- Must be of sufficient eng